# Goals
* Understand the basics of machine learning
* Understand LLM architecture and training
* Apply same to building an LLM tuned for a special purpose
* Read and understand Python code generated by an LLM or other programmer
* Use an LLM as a reference and tutorial tool.

# References
* Raschke
* 3B1B playlist: https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLZHQObOWTQDNU6R1_67000Dx_ZCJB-3pi
* https://docs.pytorch.org/tutorials/beginner/basics/tensorqs_tutorial.html
* https://docs.pytorch.org/tutorials/beginner/basics/data_tutorial.html
* https://sebastianraschka.com/blog/2020/numpy-intro.html

# Week 1
## Syllabus
* Texts
  * Should have Raschke
  * Look also at links on Syllabus page, e.g. 3B1B, Raschke, Pytorch tutorials

* Machines
  * Helpful to have own machine
  * Will be running Python code
  * Also have a powerhorse machine
* Student Background
  * Personal machines?  Mac/Windows/Linux?
  * NVidia GPUs?
  * Prior programming?  Python/other?
  * Math background? (HS, Calc, Linear?)

* Course Pace
  * Serious LLM preso in two weeks is a lot to cover!
  * Bring energy, focus, and time.  We will supply clarifications and tutorials.
  * Intro Will
  * Emphasize pre/post-lecture help
     * **It's OK to ask for help!**

## Ch 1 Raschke
## Readings
  * Raschke Ch 1, App A to 
  * At least spend 10 min on 3B1B
  * Pytorch tutorials, at least 30 min

### Pattern recognition basics
* More intensive theory later.  This is a light coverage 
* Feature space
   * Patterns expressed as numerical or possibly integral vectors of "feature" values
   * Examples
      * Grayscale image
      * Frequency spectrum of sound
      * Nonhomogeneous features, e.g. age, income, height, weight
* Words as number-patterns
   * Assign integer values the:0, and:1, etc.
   * But numbers should have significance
   * So, word embeddings -- vectors
   * Map words to embeddings, work om the embeddings
* Embedding example
   * Three concept world: small/big, cold/hot, light/heavy, ranges 0.0 to 1.0
   * (0, 1, 1) => small hot heavy thing
   * (.5, 0, 0) => midsized cold light thing
   * Words, phrases, broadly “ideas” are 3-D points.  More ideas than words.
   * Similar words/concepts are near each other in a “region”
   * Number of concepts grows rapidly with more dimensions.
   * Counting just the "corners", with 4 dimensions, 16 extremes, and $2^d$ in general.
   * with 20 dimensions?  With 265?
   * GPT uses 12,800 dimensions.  Lots of “meaning” possible.
   * And, our example cites a "privileged basis", but arbitrary directions might also have meaning.

### Python Basics
   * Basic Python concepts: interpreter, compiler, pip, packages
   * Python examples
   * Appendix A in Raschka
   * https://sebastianraschka.com/blog/2020/numpy-intro.html

# Week 2

## Ch 2 Raschke
### Intro Tokenizing
   * Rough explanation of tokenizing to start with -- BPE at end is the real algorithm
      * Still useful to understand Python text manip for LLMs
      * Preprocessing w REs at bottom of p 23
      * Brief comment on regular expressions -- not testable material in this course
   * List of words converts to a vocab dictionary in Listing 2.2
   * Converter (assuming addition of <unk> to vocab) in Listing 2.4
   * General principle: create tokens representing common text strings, with ids.
### BPE
   * This is the main method
   * Illustrate with bottles of beer song from exercise:
      * first merges: [((' ', 'o'), ' o', 18), ((' ', 'b'), ' b', 18), (('t', 't'), 'tt', 9), (('tt', 'l'), 'ttl', 9), (('ttl', 'e'), 'ttle', 9)]

### (Need clear description of NN here, to understand differentiability)    
### Output
   * Word embedding not matching any embedding.
   * Various "closeness" metrics: dot product, cosine, euclidean
   * Results in a set of possible choices, but not a probability distribution
   * Softmax
      * $\pi(z_i) = \frac{e^{z_i}}{\sum_{j=1}^K e^{z_j}}$
         * Output equivalent.  Softmax function
      * Try softmax on [0, -1, 0, 2]
      * Is it a prob distribution?
      * What happens if all values have 1 added to them?
         * Relative values, not absolute
      * Why not just "max"?
         * For considerable range of weights, doesn't change, thus no partial derivative

### Discussion of training process: batches, SGD, epochs, etc.

### 2.6
   * After NN discussion and training ideas
   * Pytorch tensors appear here and need prior review
   * Need to clarify what he's doing with targets equal in length to inputs, rather than one word??
   * Inheritance appears in Listing 2.5
   * DataLoader and DataSet classes as example Python doc

## Chapter 3
   * Skip to 3.3.  No need for RNNs or LSTMs
### 3.3.1
   * Fig 3.7.  Idea of weighted context.
      * Note that this is very oversimplified and that there are multiple layers to add
   * 2-digit values on p 37 - note for reference
   * Fig 3.8 showing dot product attention
      * Check a few using p37 data, not the 1-digit values
   * Note discussion of dot product is on point here.
   * p 59 Simple sum normalization.  
   * p 60 Softmax calc
      * Book offers some reasons but not all.  What else?
         * Dot products can be negative!
      * Smarter version with torch? 
         * Overflow is the danger - underflow just gives a 0
         * So?? Subtract max value from all values to ensure no exponential > 1.
   * Code above Fig 3.10, follow, and then rewrite w/o loops
      * (att_weights.reshape(6,1)*inputs).sum(dim=0)
### 3.3.2
   * Big 2-D tensor attention grid on p 61 is a central idea.  Will compute differently, but same concept.  What is t.sum(dim=1)?
   * Code at Fig 3.12 and after is useful tensor lesson.  Loops, or just 
      * `inputs @ inputs.T
      * What shapes?  (6,3) and (3,6)... 
      * resultant tensor is (6,6) 
      * How fast?  Does ".T" require data copying?
         * No -- just viewwpoint shift, and all in C/Rust, so much faster
   * Full operation `torch.softmax(inputs @ inputs.T, dim = -1).  
      * What alternate dim?  dim = 1.
      * Why that dim?
   * And finally attn_weights @ inputs
      * Shapes? (6,6) (6,3) -> (6,3)
      * What does each vector multiply do?  (x, y, z values, each probability-weighted per distribution)
      * Can we put inputs on the left? Only with inputs.T @ attn_weights.T, and result would be (3,6)
### 3.4
   * General story about k, q, v.  
      * Each token gets to provide a value to be mixed, not just itself.  Allows flexible extraction of relevant aspects
      * Each token will not simply attend to another by dot product
        * Such a rule means only "like" tokens attend.
      * Each token advertises a "key" .. "what I offer"
      * and posts a "query" -- "what I seek"
      * Matrices (linear transforms) for all three, drawing on token.
         * Generally from d to lower dimension, a 2-power fraction of d (text just does 3 -> 2 but that's for simplicity)
      * Fig 3.14 illustrates
   * p66 setup of the matrices
      * Significance of "Parameter" -- will be training/tweaking
      * NOTE: only one set of matrices for all the tokens.  How a query is derived, or a key, or a value, is the same, though different token sources for each.
      * Tensor code above Fig 3.15.
         * No need for one-row preliminary now -- should be able to follow this.
         * All three: (n, d) @ (d, k) -> (n,k), with n = 6, d = 3, k = 2
         * Real values might be n = 100000; d = 12000, k = 1500
   * p68 above Fig 3.16
     * Again, jump straight to full tensor code for $W_2$
     * Rename attn_weights as attn_prbs to avoid double use of "weight"
   * What's with the $/k^2$?
     * As key dimension rises, what happens to "spread" of k*q products?
     * Say a given k*q product has average? (0) and stddev(1).  95% chance within -3/3.  But if we have 10000 of them? (200 are > 3stdev)
     * Value of highest, given normal distribution, rises as $\sqrt{k}$
     * So?  We have a softmax anyway.. 
     * Try sm(2, 1, 0) vs sm(6, 3, 0)... [.665, .245, .09] vs [.95, .05, .00]                                
     * Uniform add/sub has no effect, but uniform mult is different
     * So, divide by $\sqrt{k}$ to compensate
   * An aside on "temperature" (division by in order to "flatten" the distribution)
   * p70 multiplication to get actual value


---------

### 3.4.2 Attention class
   * Review SelfAttention_v1, including "forward" method
   * Figure 3.18 is good summary
   * And SelfAttention_v2.  
      * Linear layer is a fully connected NN layer, incl bias.
      * How does this replace a matrix multiply ?
         * Note the code turns off bias by default...
         * Affine vs linear reinforcement...
### 3.5 Causal attention
   * We are training QKV matrices to be used in inference.
   * In training, should token 2 attend to token 5, for instance?
### 3.5.1 Masking for causality
   * Fig 3.19
   * Mask code and renorming
      * Is it the same as softmax on just the remaining items?
      * Why not just set 0s in upper triangle before SM? (Not the same as no attention)
   * Can avoid renorm, however, via -inf mapping before SM
### 3.5.2 Dropout
   * Underlying problem -- overfitting
   * Hinton's dropout story
   * One way to look at dropout is that we're training many different networks, more loosely connected within, and making them agree.
   * 50% dropout is a good norm -- no clear rules -- and be clear it's only during training.  Turned off in execution/inference

### 3.5.3 Full Causal Attention class
   * Note the addition of a batch layer now
      * Done by simple duplication of inputs; real case would be different per batch
      * How does this affect code in the class?  Let's see.
   * In __init__
      * Unpack torch.stack call -- new shape?  (2, 6, 3)
      * register_buffer and the bigger issue of moving data to/from GPU
   * In forward:
      * unpacking assign of shape
      * dimensions of keys, queries, etc? in terms of b, num_tokens, d_in (broadcasting..)
         * (b, num_tokens, d_out) 
      * transpose(1,2)!  What dimensions being transposed?
         * numtokens, d_out -> d_out, numTokens
         * so matrix mult gives?  (b, num_tokens, num_tokens)
         * Note value of shape tracking
      * How many separate prob distributions generated by the softmax?
         * b*num_tokens
         * Why dim = -1?  Could it be a positive?  
      * Is att_weights still a prob distr after dropout??
      * Dim of the final matmul for context_vec?  How many mat muls? How many scalar muls, adds?
         * (num_tokens, num_tokens)*(b, num_tokens, d_out)
         * 2 matmuls
         * 2*num_tokens*num_tokens*d_out multiplies
      * was "b" used anywhere in "forward"?  Why not?
      * Using the ca object -- () is mapped to forward

### 3.6 Multihead Attn
* Only one matrix each of K, Q, V -- what if we want different kinds of attention?
* Multiple "attention heads"
   * In effect, we get more values per token, one set for each of several attn heads
* Listing 3.4
   * Shape of head(x)?  Of final output?  (n, d_out) (n, d_out*numHeads)
   * Exercise 3.2

### 3.6.3 Direct Multihead
* Listing 3.4
  * Unpack the list comprehension
  * torch.cat -- we get wider value
  * Run on p 85 results in (2,6,4) shape
  * Do exercise 3.2 in class

### 3.6.2 Efficient Multihead
* Principal concept: Can pack many matrix multiplies into one
   * Say I want four Q-matrices for four heads, each 3x2
   * Create a 3x8 matrix AllQ stacking them left to right
   * X @ AllQ -> (num_tokens, 8)
   * Or, same for linear layer.  Need 4 (3 in / 2 out)? One (3 in / 8 out)
* MultiHeadAttention
   * First code that will actually be in our final implementation
   * __init__
     * d_out is now the full concatenated value dim
     * Follow division into heads, Linears that encompass all heads..
   * forward
     * All QKV for all heads computed at once
     * reshape to separate them by view
     * Transpose so that num_heads is an earlier dimension, and broadcasting will span heads
     * Standard ops then, up to the context_vec
     * Transpose it to regroup heads under tokens
     * contiguous for efficiency since the transpose after the @ values will break continguity

### 4 Building the LLM
* Structural overview p98
* Listing 4.1
  * Meaning of "*" unpacker
  * Positional embeddings
  * in_idx is simple batch of token sequences, device resident
  * Point of "logits" output (will convert to probability)
  * Preview ideas: layer normalization, logit-vector for classification, 
* Final logits output p99
  * Embedding for each token in each batch...
* Layer normalization
  * Reminder of vanishing/exploding gradients
  * Especially a problem early in training when all is random
  * Solution is to take mean and variance across an entire activation (remind what mean and variance are) and adjust to make these 0/1
  * BUT, in practice individual activations may need to skew and scale, so we also keep a learned set of adjustments to these.  
  * Deconstruct Listing 4.2
     * Parameters
     * mean/var calculation and reason for keepDim (want to broadcast)
     * norm_x is the "vanilla"
     * return expression is the individual tweak to the vanilla.  Ask
     number of operations implied (emb_dim each of mult and add)
* GELU
  * Qualitative discussion of Relu strength (simplicity, extended positive gradient) and weakness (dead neurons, no gradient below zero, discontinuous
  * Qualitative discussion of GELU shape, using Fig 4.8.  
     * "Swoosh" below zero helps with dead neurons, encourages positive pull
     * Approximation makes compute easier.
     * There is deeper math justifying formal definition, but beyond class scope.
* Listing 4.4 Simple FFN
  * Added piece after Attn block, as we'll see. 
  * Brief overview.  Number of trainable weights? (8(emb_dim)^2)
* Residual connections (aka "shortcut" in Raschke)
  * Fig 4.12 
  * Needs embedding dim to be consistent
  * Note that in right side, each sub network has a partial *direct* path to output, and thus some degree of *direct* impact
  * Reduces vanishing gradients, as indicated in the diagram.
  * Original reason was this, when introduced 10 years ago for image recognition.
  * Newer way to understand is that each unit is learning to *adjust* the input from the prior one.  It is the computed outputs that are the real "add", not the shortcut paths.  "Residual" means "remaining bit to add for correctness".  
  * Listing 4.5 and retrieval of gradient information
     * Possibly more on this next week, App A has greater detail.
* Fig 4.13 Transformer Block
  * This is the core module in a transformer LLM, repeated N times
  * Note our attention block is in the middle
  * The pattern of layer norms, residuals, etc. is partly experience, but has theoretical underpinning too.  Beyond course scope
  * Listing 4.6 
     * Actually pretty straightforward after all preceding work.
     * follow init and forward code
* Fig 4.15 Putting it all together
  * Full detail on that initial sketch at the start of the chapter
  * Note the 12x
  * Understand input and output (still not quite at choosing word)
  * Follow listing 4.7 briefly
  * Critically, understand in/out shape on p. 120, for 4-token context
* Read up on parameter counts, and expect HW exercise like Ex 4.1, but bigger
  * Parameter counting is a good way to be sure you understand the architecture
* Deconstruct Listing 4.8
  * Understand idx -- current context (in e.g. 2 batches)
  * Logits shape (batch, seq, vocab vector) (relate back to example output)
  * Pick out batch/logits
  * idx_next via argmax.  Alternative?
  * cat and reason for keepDim
* final result on p 127

s------------------
## Deep Learning (neural networks)
 * NN basics
   * Perceptron or neuron
      * weights and bias
	  * activation function
	     * Many choices.  We'll start with tanh-like function
   * Network of 3-4 layers.  Count weights
    * input neurons
    * Discuss weights as determinant of behavior
    * Training is searching in <fill in> dimension space.
 * Brief overview of gradient descent
	 * And we'll use prebuilt tools but...
 * Layers as matrix multiplications
   * Each neuron does a vector dot product on outputs from prior layer, plus a bias
   * write out W matrix in wij form to show why it works well
   * extend to include base via homogenous coords
   * Stacking the neurons in rows lets you view the entire layer as a big matrix multiplication, with a matrix of shape (Lout, Lin+1)
   * This produces only the arguments to the activation function.
   * Graphically, this means each layer performs an affine transformation, rotating, skewing, and *translating* the input "space", and then doing an activation function.
 * Activation functions
   * Earliest research in 1960s used step function, but discontinuity makes training impossible because gradual changes have no effect.
   * Must have nonlinearity, though.  Ask to reduce example network to one layer of 4 neurons with linear activation.
   * Common practical activation functions
     * relu "rectified linear unit" currently the most popular
	 * Older choice, and sometimes still used, was sigmoid 1 / (1 + e^-x)  
	 	* Is symmetrical around x=0  (1 / (1 + e^x) + 1 / (1 + e^-x) == 1)
		* Rounded heaviside step function
 * NN Training
   * Use set of known correct inputs and output as examples
   * Start with random weights
   * Try samples, determine error, adjust weights to reduce error
   * When error is low, or zero, for samples, (hopefully) unknown samples are correctly classified as well
 * Gradient descent "tweaking" method
   * Weights of net are a "space" in their own right.
   * Each "point" in the weight space exhibits some inaccuracy or "loss"
     * Thus, we can think of a "loss function" or "cost function" on the domain of weight space.
	 * An exact loss function might be sum of squares of difference between actual and computed outcome on each output
	 * Many others are possible and we'll use several this term
   * Say we had just two weights
     * Cost function is now a surface above the x/y plane
	 * pC/px and pC/py are slopes of the function along x and y axis.
	 * [pC/px, pC/py] is the gradient -- direction of max increase.  And it's negative is max decrease
	 * We can start at any point (weight vector) compute C's partial derivatives at that point, and adjust
	   * Do this repeatedly, like ball rolling downhill
	   * Why be incremental?  Wouldn't large steps be better (they answer)
	   * (slopes change, and overshoots are possible)
	 * This "gradient descent" approach is what backpropagation uses.
	   * Computing the partial derivatives is the big challenge -- later
	   * Intuitively, though, we work backward through the weights
	   * Interesting bit of history
  * Improvements to gradient descent for NN
    * SGD concept
    * Nature of very large dimensional SGD
      * Local optima *rare* (possibly theoretically nonexistent in the limit)
      * Saddle points are the big issue
    * Adagrad, Adam, etc. improvements
  * Problems with deep neural networks
    * Vanishing gradient problem (Now we see why we might have saddle points!)
    * Value of Relu activation function
      * But, dead neurons
      * Relu variants
  * Three levels of data: training, validation, test
  * Model training and overfitting
  * Managing overfitting
    * Ideally, more data!
    * Autogeneration of data
    * Don't make network "too smart".  Right size, not max size.
    * Weight regularization
      * Large weights tend to overspecialize/overfit.  Demanding limited 
      * Adding weights themselves to the loss function encourages reduced weight.
      * For deep learning, best done by cW^2 cost, ensuring positive value.
    
## Ch 11 and optimization of NN training
  * Big idea re variance across layers
      * "Signal strength" is variance of inputs and outputs
      * Want this to remain steady across layers
      * Ditto for gradients (limit exploding/vanishing gradients)

  * Initialization
    * Why not all-zeros?
    * Glorot initialization or He initialization
      * Big advance
      * Initialize for steady-variance
      * Eq 11-1 p 360
      * What does this say about per-value variance?
      * Note small tweaks for different activation functions
  * Batch Normalization
      * Follow eq 11-4 on p 368
      * Difference between $\mu, \sigma$ and $\gamma, \beta$
        * First are rolling-average obtained direct from data
        * Latter are gradient-descent learned.  
          * What does that mean?? **Outputs are re-scaled and re-normed to improve error reduction**
        * Parameter counts on p370, incl trainable/nontrainable

## Transformers
### Attention Layer
* Reference Thickstun
* Queries, Keys, Values
   * Go over the math.  Check matrix dimensions
   * Example: "adjective query seeks noun word".  Assume some embedding direction for each.

### Positional Encoding
* One-hot adds too many dimensions with large context window
* Single positional value is too imprecise; doesn't allow clean delineation of different distances
* Sin/cos model
  * Unique positioning within one wavelength, per Fig 16-9
  * What range of "wavelength"s?  **6.28 to 62,800**
  * Addition in effect gives existing semantics plus location, e.g. "noun at 5 distance"
  * Dot product of two positions at $\beta$ distance, with first at $\alpha$:
    * Visualize as two vectors at $(cos(alpha), sin(alpha))$ and $(cos(\alpha+\beta), sin(\alpha+\beta))$
    * How do they change as $\alpha$ increases?  **Rotate together**
    * How does dot product change?  **It doesn't**
    * Range of unambiguous distance? **pi**
  * Does it skew toward more fine distances or more coarse ones?
    * What is wavelength at d/2?  **$\tau \sqrt(10000) = 628**
    * So 6.28 to 628 get half the bandwidth, 628 to 10,000 the other half

### Top Layer
  * Big MLP with huge softmax output
  * Concept of temperature

### Use as translator (thus "transformer")
* One of many configurations
  * Train feeding input mode sequences into encoder, desired output mode sequences into decoder
  * Cross-attention layer (K, V from encoder, Q from decoder)
  * Decoder self-attention has interesting masking requirement

### Transformer field Has Exploded
* "Attention" can be many things
  * e.g. how different parts of an image attend to one another
* Transformer idea used lots of ways
  * Visual transformer
    * 16x16 patches are "words"
      * About how big is the "vocabulary"? **3x256x16x16 = ~197,000**
    * "Embedding" boils each down to a smaller vector, kind of like a big convolution
    * Add positional encoding
      * Linear, interestingly, not 2-D
    * Go through math in Dosovitskiy
  * Many others, with important papers cited in Geron

## Week 7
### Loss Functions
  * Information Entropy
    * Equation -ln(p(x)) p(x)  defined 0 when p(x) is 0
    * Progressive examples
      * Coin toss
      * 8-way dice
      * 1/2, 1/4, 1/8, 1/8 encoded by 0 10 110 111
      * What's the effect of using ln instead of lg?  Ln is easier mathematically
    * Binary Crossentropy
      * Entropy, but with bit lengths determined by wrong distribution.
      * What is entropy of ground-truth distribution for a specific input?
      * What if we used, say .5 for 1 and .5 for 0 
      * With y as ground truth and y' as estimate: - (y ln(y') + (1-y) ln(1-y'))
      * Try for y = 1 and y' = .8, or y' = .2.  Ditto for y = 0, y' = .8, y = .2
      * Derivative of ce wrt y' if y == 1?  If y == 0?
    * Categorical crossentropy
      * Natural extension.  S(i) yi ln (y'i)
      * Value for [.5, .25, .25] if y == 0?  If y == 2?
      * Derivatives?




